---
tags:
  - Incomplete
---

# Tribes: We Need You To Lead Us

Author: Seth Godin

> A tribe is a group of people connected to one another, connected, to a leader,
> and connected to an idea.

> A group needs only two things to be a tribe: a shared interest and a way to
> communicate.

Seth first mentions Joel Spolsky, a software developer. One of his notable
contributions is [The Joel Test](programming/joel-test.md), a means of seeing
how good a software development team is.[^1]

Geography limitations have largely been eliminated since the internet became
generally accessible. [Social Media](social-media/index.md) has helped bridge
those gaps. But the internet is not a requirement of a tribe, just a means of
helping a tribe thrive.

> The real power of tribes has nothing to do with the Internet and everything to
> do with people.

There is a difference between management and [leadership](leadership/index.md).
"Management is about manipulating resources to get a known job done".
Leadership, on the other hand, "is about creating change that you believe in".

The concept of a manager stems from kings and royalty. A king uses power to
maintain status quo. Their direct reports have a vested interest in maintaining
that because of the compensation they receive. The same structure is applied in
many corporations. In the modern time, marketing gave those without power
leverage over the CEO/king and allowed for tribes to form.

The only constant is change; people want new, innovative ideas. Old and mediocre
ideas don't spread.

By definition, a _tribe_ has an opinion about a topic. They believe in it; if
it's a movement, they want the opposite to _not_ occur. A leader in this case
steps up and takes a position, connecting with that tribe to help guide them to
interconnect. Tesla[^2] as an example disrupted the automotive market by
bringing a fully electric vehicle to mainstream markets.

> Intractable problems fall in the face of movements.

[^1]: Joel was also a co-founder of Stack Overflow, along-side Jeff Atwood.
[^2]:
    Ignoring the current tailspin the CEO is in and the resulting collateral
    damage, of course.
